Add more rules on preprocessor expressions and their types (#16)
j3-fortran/fpp-202y: drafts/25-revise-24-177 Fortran preprocessor requirements.txt

    7. FPP recognizes /* ... */ C-style comments on directive lines.
    8. Expressions in #if and #elif directives contain constructs from
       both Fortran and CPP.

>     9. Expressions in #if and #elif directives evaluate to INTEGER values.
>        Zero values are treated as 'false'. Non-zero values are treated as
>        'true'.

Reviewer: When it comes time to actually write spec wording for this, it's not enough to say the expression "evaluate to INTEGER values". There must be additional constraints to rule out (for example) character strings in preprocessor conditional expressions.

For now it might be sufficient to say something like 
```suggestion
    9. Expressions in #if and #elif directives must be integer constant expressions as in CPP
       (with the extensions described below), and evaluate to INTEGER values.
       As in CPP, zero values are treated as 'false'. Non-zero values are treated as
       'true'.
```

Author: Will incorporate this change.

    10 .FALSE. is treated as the integer 0. .TRUE. is treated as the

>        integer 1.

Reviewer: What about `.false.` and `.true.`?

Author: I will add `.false.` and `.true.` explicitly.

>     11. Undefined identifiers are treated as zero, as in CPP.

Reviewer: Minor clarification, inspired by C spec wording:
```suggestion
    11. Any undefined identifiers that remain after macro expansion (including those 
        lexically identical to keywords or intrinsics) are treated as zero, as in CPP.
```

    12. C character constants (such as 'A', '\n') are treated as

>         integer values, as they are in C.

Reviewer: This run-on list of rules needs to be restructured to clarify that the rule above (and possibly others?) only apply to the conditional expression in `#if/#elif`. For example this does not impact macro expansion in source.

Author: In fact, all this feels like it should move down to (current) section 4, Directive Processing.

And since I still plan to write the mythical paper on compiler phases, section 2 (The basic idea: phases before the "processor") should be deleted. Section 3, too. (FPP Phase 1: Line conjoining).

>     13. The Fortran operators .AND., .OR., ,NOT., .EQ., .NE., .EQV., and
>         .NEQV. calculate the save values as the C operators &&, ||, !, ==,
>         !=, ==, and !=, respectively.

Reviewer: Here you're assuming we also accept the suggestion in issue #13 to add these additional Fortran operators to the draft. If we were to merge this PR alone as-is, these new rules would be inconsistent with the earlier list of operators.

This PR purports to address only #14 (which IMO has a strong stand-alone motivation), and I'd like to keep it focused on that proposal without conflating the orthogonal issue #13 (where the motivation may be seen as potentially weaker).

Please decouple these two PRs. I suggest removing the "new" operators above and getting this PR into a mergeable state to address solely #14, and then PR #15 can later introduce the obvious extension for the operators proposed by #13.

```suggestion
    13. The Fortran operators .AND., .OR., ,NOT., =, /= evaluate to the same values as 
        the C operators &&, ||, !, ==, and !=, respectively.
```

Author: Will incorporate this change.

>     14. The Fortran operators .LT., .LE., .GT., and .GE. calculate the
>         same values as the C operators <, <=, >, and >=, respectively.

Reviewer: Same comment here, please move this new rule to PR #15

```suggestion
```

Author: Will incorporate this change.

    15. Integer expressions in preprocessor directives are calculated in
        the maximum precision the processor supports. (There are no KIND

>         specifiers on integer constants in the preprocessor.)

Reviewer: This feels like it should be two separate rules. IIUC the parenthetical is actually prohibiting certain syntax, so it should not be parenthetical.

Author: Will create two rules.

directives are executed. Macros are expanded in non-preprocessor lines
(Fortran source lines).

The directive language accepted by FPP is based on the syntax of CPP. It

> is not Fortran, but can contain arbitrary Fortran tokens. It differs

Reviewer 2: My thought in regard to "It is not Fortran" is that it helps the uninitiated reader (the people from the standard committee who will read this) understand where we're coming from. FPP lines are "not Fortran" in the sense that they do not follow any of the existing rules set in the Fortran standard, and so we can't approach it as if they did. The syntax of a FPP line is essentially "C with some Fortran extensions".

The "can contain arbitrary Fortran tokens" part seems unnecessary, though.

> is not Fortran, but can contain arbitrary Fortran tokens. It differs

Author: Thanks for this. What I'm trying to say is based on the following:

- The preprocessor is not doing string manipulation. It's doing token manipulation.
- Directives don't look like Fortran; they look like what you would see in CPP. So, it's not Fortran and it's not CoCo, and ...
- In the replacement text of a macro name or function-like macro, any legal Fortran tokens are allowed. This is behavior that expands on what CPP allows.
- In the replacement text of a macro name or function-like macro, a subset of C tokens may also make sense. (For example, in an identifier or function that will be expanded in a `#if` or `#elif`.)
- As Aury points out, nothing has to be syntactically valid until completely expanded. And it's not the preprocessor that cares. (later syntactic analysis for proper Fortran source will.)

> is not Fortran, but can contain arbitrary Fortran tokens. It differs

Reviewer: I'm not sure I agree with everything in @gklimowicz 's reply above, but it's not important to resolve today.

I propose this concrete change to the wording to convey what I think we mean, without diving into too many details:

```suggestion
has syntax that differs from Fortran, but macros can expand to include arbitrary Fortran tokens. It differs
```

from C and Fortran syntax in the following ways.

Token recognition:
    1. FPP's directives and token recognition are case sensitive.
    2. FPP treats blanks adjacent to tokens as significant, even in
       fixed-form source files.

Line continuation in directives:
    1. FPP directive lines accept backslash (\) for line continuations.
    2. FPP does not recognize fixed-form (column 6) or free-form (&)
       continuations on directive lines.

Comment handling:
    1. FPP does not recognize '!' as initiating a comment on directive

>        lines. '!' is interpreted as the C 'not' operator.

Reviewer 2: I actually just tested this.
- Line 1: not operator, as intended

- Line 2: **Currently, different predecessors handle this differently, in a pretty significant way that I think we'll need to address.** For example:
```F90
#define PI 3.141 ! close enough for government work
print *, PI, "foo"
end
```
ifx and nagfor compile and execute this program and print "3.141000     foo" (whitespace differs due to print semantics, but same contents)
flang ("flang-trunk" on godbolt.org) compiles and executes and  prints "3.141".
gfortran compiles and executes and prints "3.14100003". Ignoring the floating point precision difference, gfortran and flang don't print "foo" because it performs the macro substitution like this:
```
print *, 3.141 ! close enough for government work, "foo"
````
(Output of `-E` flag with gfortran. `-E` with flang just outputs "print *, 3.141" so I guess their preprocessor also deletes comments.)
They treat the "!" just as any other text, and so it substitutes the "! close enough for government work" into the middle of the statement.
Both the gfortran/flang and nagfor/ifx approaches have merits, but IMO the expected behavior of a Fortran programmer would be the nagfor/ifx behavior. It seems extremely easy to make unnoticed mistakes if "! comment" gets substituted literally.
So, I prefer we say that "!" is treated as a comment by the preprocessor on `#define` lines.

- Line 3: gfortran, ifx, nagfor, and flang all seem to just ignore all text after an `#endif`. You can even write
```
#endif foo
```
(no comment indicator) and none of them complain. It doesn't matter that much what we pick, but my thought on the matter is that the standard should say something equivalent to "text on the life after `#endif` is treated as a comment".

----

Also what about this? 😄 
```
#include "file.f90" hello
```
ifx and nagfor both silently ignore text after the file name string on the `#include` line. gfortran ignores it, but with a warning: "extra tokens at end of #include directive". I'm not sure about flang on godbolt.org because I don't see a way to  have multiple files, but based on the error message it gave, I think it behaves like ifx and nagfor:
```
/app/example.f90:1:10: error: #include: Source file 'file.f90' was not found
  #include "file.f90" hello
           ^^^^^^^^^^
```
So, I figure the standard can just say text after the file name on an `#include` is ignored, just like with `#endif`.

>        lines. '!' is interpreted as the C 'not' operator.

Reviewer: @aury6623 said:
> different predecessors handle this differently,

Thanks for the report.

It sounds like this is yet another "dark corner" where current practice has significantly diverged in the vacuum created by a lack of standardization. IMHO resolving such discrepancies to improve the user experience is the most important motivation for our overall effort.

That being said, I don't think it's productive for the requirements document to attempt to dive into such a fine-grained level of detail. This one of a long list of discrepancies to be resolved when we are actually drafting edits.

In any case, the observation definitely seems orthogonal to the goal of this PR.

>        lines. '!' is interpreted as the C 'not' operator.

Reviewer 2: Sure. I just think we might not want to say
```
    1. FPP does not recognize '!' as initiating a comment on directive
       lines. '!' is interpreted as the C 'not' operator.
```
here.

Perhaps only mention `#if` for now and sneak away from mentioning other cases until later.
```
   1. FPP does not recognize '!' as initiating a comment on #if lines.
       '!' is interpreted as the C 'not' operator.
```

Or be bold and add to that:
```
   1a. FPP recognizes '!' as initiating a comment on #define lines.
```

>        lines. '!' is interpreted as the C 'not' operator.

Author: The handling of `!` is complicated, and I wanted to start with a simple rule first.

For example, I don't think the following should define `NOT_NASA` as empty:
```
#define NOT_NASA ! NASA
#if NOT_NASA
```

So, syntactically, I think the only allowable comment indicators FPP should accept on directives of any kind are `/* ... */` style. We can't allow `//` either, for Fortran token reasons.

>        lines. '!' is interpreted as the C 'not' operator.

Author: With respect to `#include`, I was following the C preprocessor here, where a `#include` is allowed to contain things like `"foo.h"` or `<foo.h>`, or a sequence of preprocessing tokens that are expanded to match one of these two forms. All of these are immediately followed by a new-line. See 6.10.2 paragraph 4 in the C23 working draft. (This behavior goes back to C99.)

If we want to be stricter than CPP, I would recommend the C90 statement that only sequences like `"foo.h"` and `<foo.h>` be allowed.

CPP does not appear to allow gratuitous text after the file name as in `#include "file.f90" hello`.

    2. FPP does not recognize '//' as initiating a comment on directive
       lines. '//' can be used to construct macro definitions that
       contain Fortran string concatenation.
    3. FPP recognizes /* ... */ C-style comments on directive lines.
       /* ... */ comments are not recognized in (non-directive)
       Fortran source lines.
    4. Macros are expanded in comment lines that appear to be directives
       (processor-specific, such as '!$omp', or '!$acc', or others).

Constant expressions in #if and #elif:
    1. Expressions in #if and #elif directives allow operators from
       both Fortran and CPP.
    2. Expressions in #if and #elif directives must be integer constant

>        expressions as in CPP (with the extensions described below), and

Reviewer 2: In Fortran standardese, an "integer constant expression" is any constant expression that has an overall/result type of integer. For example, `FLOOR(SUM([1.0,2.0,3.0])) + LEN("ABC"//"DEF")` is a (scalar!) integer constant expression with the value 12, just going by the existing wording in the standard.

Obviously this sentence I've highlighted isn't going to go in the standard verbatim anyway, but my point is just that when it comes time for edits, we might need to be careful about reusing words like "constant expression". In this case we'd at least want to say something like "after macro expansion and substitution of .FALSE., .TRUE., and char constants, all primaries in the expression shall be integer literals".

Reviewer: I agree with the spirit of @aury6623 's observation, but not the proposed resolution.

In this wording: (emphasis added)

> must be integer constant expressions **as in CPP**

"as in CPP" was intended to convey "as specified for CPP", meaning both the C language definition of the term ["integer constant expression"](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/constant_expression#:~:text=(since%20C99)-,Integer%20constant%20expression,-An%20integer%20constant), and the [additional constraints that CPP places on #if and #elif directive expressions](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/preprocessor/conditional#:~:text=Condition%20evaluation).

@aury6623 would this minimal change resolve your concern for the purposes of the requirements document?

```suggestion
    2. Expressions in #if and #elif directives must be integer constant
       expressions as specified for CPP (with the extensions described below), and
```

Presumably when it comes time to write actual edits we won't be writing as a diff against CPP (done here for brevity), so such terminology differences should not even arise.

> say something like "after macro expansion and substitution of .FALSE., .TRUE., and char constants, all primaries in the expression shall be integer literals".

This proposed wording would be incorrect for several reasons: the `defined` operator, and also rule 4 below.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I interpreted "as in CPP" to mean something like "CPP only allows integers in their preprocessor expressions, so we will too".

I don't know if "as specified for CPP" is even sufficient for someone who does not know that "integer constant expression" has a different definition in C. I think it would need to be more explicit, like:
```
    2. Expressions in #if and #elif directives must be integer constant
       expressions, using the definition of "integer constant expression" as defined by C, with the extensions described below, and
```
though of course that is quite verbose.

Another option to avoid using the term "integer constant expression" entirely:
```suggestion
    2. Expressions in #if and #elif directives must only contain integer primaries,
       with the extensions described below, and
```

---

> Presumably when it comes time to write actual edits we won't be writing as a diff against CPP

Definitely not. I think the closest we'd be able to get is mentioning the C preprocessor in a note.

> This proposed wording would be incorrect for several reasons: the defined operator, and also rule 4 below.

I didn't expect my wording to be perfect or ready for the standard, hence the wording prefixed with "at least want to say something like". However, I expect that our final edit will have to include the words "shall only contain integer primaries" with some sort of list of caveats to accommodate things like `defined` and `.TRUE.` and `'A'`. There's no way we'd be allowed to say anything close to "shall be an integer constant expression as defined by \<reference to C standard\>".

Reviewer: @aury6623 suggested:
> #if and #elif directives must only contain integer primaries,

"integer constant expression" is clearly defined in the C spec and used in about 80 places throughout C23. We could cite the exact relevant section (C23 6.10.2-3) if we think that helps. For discussion purposes, here is the actual C23 prose:

> The expression that controls conditional inclusion shall be an integer constant expression except that: identifiers (including those lexically identical to keywords) are interpreted as described subsequently in this subclause197) and it may contain zero or more `defined` macro expressions, `has_include` expressions, `has_embed` expressions, and/or `has_c_attribute` expressions as unary operator expressions.

The compound phase "integer primaries" you suggest (or "integer primary") does not seem to appear anywhere in F23, which means that wording seems to leave the door open to more misunderstanding. Also unlike the C reference above, one is left to scratch their head about macro expansion of identifiers, treatment of undefined identifiers, the `defined` operator, and logical expressions, etc.

Author: Many of these details will be explicit in the syntax. I don't want to go overboard trying to establish too detailed a set of semantic rules if we don't have the syntax to hang it on.

For the purposes of requirements, "it's integers all the way down". And C23 is the rationale.

       evaluate to INTEGER values. As in CPP, zero values are treated as
       'false'. Non-zero values are treated as 'true'.
    3. .FALSE. and .false. are treated as the integer 0. .TRUE. and .true.
       are treated as the integer 1.
    4. Any undefined identifiers that remain after macro expansion
       (including those lexically identical to keywords or intrinsics)
       are treated as zero, as in CPP.
    5. C character constants (such as 'A', '\n') are treated as

>        integer values, as they are in CPP.

Reviewer 2: Like my previous comment, we may need to avoid saying "character constant" when we mean something like `'A'` because in Fortran, a character constant is `"ABCDE"`. Perhaps we'll have to call them "char constant"? \*shrug\*

Author: I think this, too, will be explicit in the expression syntax. We will want a lexical analyzer that is smart enough to say that in the context of preprocessor expressions, 'A' is a character constant, "A" is a string, 'AA' is not a character constant. The first is legal in an expression, but the others are not.

In a `#define`, all are legal tokens that could be expanded from a macro name or macro function.

Author: @aury6623 what would you change in the context of "requirements" (not syntax at this time)? I'm comfortable leaving as it is for now.

Reviewer 2: I'll accept that the current wording is probably fine for requirements. I don't think anyone will be confused.

    6. The Fortran operators .AND., .OR., ,NOT., =, and /= evaluate

>        to the same values as the C operators &&, ||, !, ==, and !/,

Author: Whoops. I'll fix this. (I won't commit this here, as I tend to get all tangled up merging it from `origin/preprocessor-expressions-are-integer-expressions`.)

>        to the same values as the C operators &&, ||, !, ==, and !/,

Reviewer: IIUC this typo was introduced in this PR branch, so it should be fixed here prior to merge

    __VA_OPT__  in the replacement-list of a function-like macro
      that uses the ellipsis notation in the parameters.

__STDF__ is an analog to __STDC__ in C and __cplusplus in C++. Its
primary role is to provide preprocessor-visible and vendor-independent
identification of the underlying target language (i.e., "the processor
is Fortran"), which enables one to write multi-language header files

> with conditional compilation based on language.

Author: In the future, I will work to suppress my OCD tendencies in this regard. It's a curse, especially when working with others.

> with conditional compilation based on language.

Reviewer: > I put the original text back.

Thanks, but I don't yet see a commit reverting the whitespace change?
